<article>

# Shift operations

## Introduction

One of the basic class of operations of Umbral calculus is $T^a$, the shift-$a$ operator $[T^ap](x)=p(x+a)$. We use round brackets (“parentheses”) to indicate evaluation. The square bracket encloses the polynomial _after_ the $T^a$ operation.

We define a class of _shift-invariant_ operators as those which _commute_ with $T^a$: $ST^a=T^aS$. The shift operators commute with each other: $T^aT^b=T^{a+b}=T^bT^a$. The use of exponential notation indicates these features.

_Any_ shift-invariant linear operator $S$ can be expanded in the differential operator, $D$, when operating on polynomials. We first look at the effect on monomials, $x^n$:

$$\begin{aligned}
[Sx^n](a)&=[T^aSx^n](0)\\
&=[ST^ax^n](0)\\
&=[S(x+a)^n](0)\\
&=\sum\limits_{k=0}^n\binom nk a^{n-k}[Sx^k](0)
\end{aligned}$$

We note:

$$D^kx^n=\frac{n!}{(n-k)!}x^{n-k}$$

It can be shown using normal calculus that $D$ is itself shift-invariant: $[DT^ap](x)=[Dp](x+a)=[T^aDp](x)$.

Therefore

$$[Sx^n](a)=\sum\limits_{k=0}^n\left[\frac{D^kx^n}{k!}\right](a)[Sx^k](0)$$

Finally we can write the operator $S$ in terms of $D$:

$$S=\sum\limits_{k=0}^\infty\left[S\frac{x^k}{k!}\right](0)D^k$$

We can take the upper limit to infinity because we operate on polynomials for which only a finite number of $D$ operations are non-zero. Since the operator is linear, we generalise from the effect on the monomials.

Applying $T^a$ as translation by $a$, we have $T^ax^n(0)=a^n$, which give Taylor’s theorem in operator form: $T^a=\sum (aD)^k/k!$.

The expansion tells us that $S=\sum b_kD^k$ for some sequence. The operator is not invertible if $b_0=0$ since $D$ reduces the order of a polynomial by 1. If $k$ is the lowest index for $b_k\ne0$, the order of the polynomial is reduced by k. The null space of $S$ is then all polynomials of degree less than $k$.

An interesting class of operators has $b_0=0$, but $b_1\ne0$. These _delta_ operators, notionally indicated by using the letter $Q$, are such that $Qx$ is a constant.

_Difference operators_ are variously symbolized using delta characters: $\Delta,\delta, \nabla$.  It is found that $\Delta x=\delta x=\nabla x=1$, so delta by name, delta by nature.

The expansions in terms of $D$ also tells us that any two shift-invariant operators commute.
</article>