## Talkin’ ’bout my generation

We have loosely considered “infinitesimal” rotations generated on the definitional n-dimensional space by $\Omega$. These small rotations can be compounded to give finite ones in the limit, much as one can view exponentials as a product of increasingly small linear displacements: $$\exp(x)=\lim_{n\rightarrow\infty}\left(1+\frac x n\right)^n$$

To do this it is useful to separate off the parameterization of the rotation group from those arising from the base space in which the rotations are envisaged as acting. There are a number of reasons for this as will become apparent as we proceed.

As our finite-izable parameters we will use the antisymmetric set $\omega_{ab}$. That they are group parameters, we indicate with subscripts in the early part of the alphabet. For the action on (Euclidean) space, we have a set of generators, $(\mathrm J^{ab})^i_j$, with the super-/sub-scripts near to $i$ indicating their reference to space (or later representation) co-ordinates.

The finite group action is given by $$\exp\left(\frac 1 2\omega_{ab}\mathrm J^{ab}\right)=\lim_{n\rightarrow\infty}\left(\mathrm I+\frac {\omega_{ab}\mathrm J^{ab}} {2n}\right)^n.$$ The factor of $\frac 1 2$ accounts for the double counting arising from the antisymmetry of the parameters. Since $\omega$ projects out the antisymmetric part of $\mathrm J$, only $\mathrm J^{ab}=-\mathrm J^{ba}$ is meaningful for the group, and hence the double counting.

The product is taken in the sense of matrix multiplication with $(\mathrm I)^i_j = \delta^i_j$ and $(\mathrm J^{ab})^i_j$. Initially we will do this in the base space. Occasionally we may slip and write $1$ for $\mathrm I$. I hope you will be able to correct in your head for these and other such, errors.

We now want to work out what the $\mathrm J^{ab}$ generators actually are. We start from $\frac 1 2\omega_{ab}(\mathrm J^{ab})^i_j=\omega^i_j.$ We also need from the previous page, expressed with $a,b$ subscripts: $$\omega_{ab}=\omega^k_a\eta_{kb}\implies \omega^i_j=\omega_{ab}\eta^{bi}\delta^a_j.$$

Taking our equation we get: $$\frac 1 2\omega_{ab}(\mathrm J^{ab})^i_j=\omega_{ab}\eta^{bi}\delta^a_j=\frac 1 2\omega_{ab}(\eta^{bi}\delta^a_j-\eta^{ai}\delta^b_j)$$

This gives us: $$(\mathrm J^{ab})^i_j=\eta^{bi}\delta^a_j-\eta^{ai}\delta^b_j.$$

The Lie algebra is found by making commutators, $[\mathrm J^{ab},\mathrm J^{cd}]=\mathrm J^{ab}\mathrm J^{cd}-\mathrm J^{cd}\mathrm J^{ab}.$ An example term of the product $\mathrm J^{ab}\mathrm J^{cd}$ is $\eta^{bi}\delta^a_k\eta^{dk}\delta^c_j=\eta^{da}\eta^{bi}\delta^c_j.$ One finds after brute-force calculation or using antisymmetry arguments (I did a combination): $$[\mathrm J^{ab},\mathrm J^{cd}]=\eta^{bd}\mathrm J^{ac}-\eta^{ad}\mathrm J^{bc}-\eta^{bc}\mathrm J^{ad}+\eta^{ac}\mathrm J^{bd}.$$ We note that the result is a linear combination of generators, as expected for a Lie group. We could even create an expression for the structure constants, but I’m not sure that would be useful at this stage.