## Flatland

We now want to consider concrete examples, starting with two dimensional rotations. There are no one-dimensional rotations, only the reflection: $x\rightarrow -x,$ which is not connected with the identity map.

As is often the case, there are some peculiarities with rotation groups of lower dimension. For 2-dimensional rotations, one of these peculiarities, we will find, is that the rotations commute, i.e. it is an “Abelian” group. This is not true in higher dimensions.

So let’s start by considering the $\omega$ parameter set: there is only one, $\omega_{12}=-\omega_{21}.$ The corresponding generator on two-dimensional space is: $$(\mathrm J^{12})^i_j=\eta^{2i}\delta^1_j-\eta^{1i}\delta^2_j.$$

Up to now we have avoided matrix representations as not particularly helpful when there is a profusion of indices. Here we will define space vectors $x^i$ as column matrices. The superscript indexes the rows of the column. We take subscripts as indexing columns of the generators (and rotations).

Hence: $$\mathrm J^{12}=\begin{pmatrix}0&1\\-1&0\end{pmatrix}.$$

An interesting observation comes with squaring the generator: $$(\mathrm J^{12})^2=-\begin{pmatrix}1&0\\0&1\end{pmatrix}=-\mathrm I.$$

Relating $\mathrm I$ to $1$, this is a bit like the imaginary square root of $-1$, $i=\sqrt{-1}.$. This gives a simple route to the exponential giving the rotation: $$\mathrm R(\omega_{12})=\exp(\omega_{12}\mathrm J^{12})=\cos(\omega_{12})\mathrm I+\sin(\omega_{12})\mathrm J^{12}=\begin{pmatrix}\cos(\omega_{12})&\sin(\omega_{12})\\-\sin(\omega_{12})&\cos(\omega_{12})\end{pmatrix}$$

This is based on the Euler relation: $\exp(i\theta)=\cos(\theta)+i\sin(\theta).$

I should also mention that we have collapsed $\frac 1 2\omega_{ab}\mathrm J^{ab}=\frac 1 2(\omega_{12}\mathrm J^{12}+\omega_{21}\mathrm J^{21})=\omega_{12}\mathrm J^{12},$ upon considering the antisymmetry of both $\omega$ and $\mathrm J$ in the last term in the bracket. If one wanted to be finicky, there are also two terms in the implied sum of the far left of the series of of equalities that are zero (e.g. $\omega_{11}\mathrm J^{11}=0$), also due to antisymmetry.

As it happens, the rotations are clockwise with increasing $\omega_{12}.$ This is in contrast to the usual representation of complex numbers. Choosing $\omega_{21}$ as the parameter would have given the opposite, more conventional result.

You may have heard/read (or not) that Abelian group representation are one-dimensional. What does that mean here? The rotations here are acting on a two-dimensional space. This means it can be broken down into two complex one-dimensional representations.

In a sense this is standard if you know something about complex numbers. Rotations in the complex plane (Argand diagram) are represented by multiplications by unit-modulus complex numbers. This is what Euler’s relation is telling us.

In another sense this is one of the motivations I have for writing all this — it is the first appearance of one of the aspects I haven’t fully grasped: how real and complex representations of physical objects intertwine, most famously in the Wick rotation connection between 4-dimensional Euclidean space and (1+3)-dimensional Minkowski time+space of relativity. If you know better, answers in an email please.