## Complex flatness

So we want the 1-dimensional representations of
$$\mathrm R(\omega_{12})=\exp(\omega_{12}\mathrm J^{12})=\cos(\omega_{12})\mathrm I+\sin(\omega_{12})\mathrm J^{12}=\begin{pmatrix}\cos(\omega_{12})&\sin(\omega_{12})\\-\sin(\omega_{12})&\cos(\omega_{12})\end{pmatrix}$$

The matrix is normal, since it commutes with its Hermitean conjugate ($\mathrm R^\dagger=-\mathrm R$), and hence diagonizable (probably not in the Chambers or Oxford English dictionaries). The procedure is to find the $\lambda$-roots (eigenvalues of $\mathrm R$) of:
$$\det(\mathrm R-\lambda\mathrm I)=(\cos (\omega_{12})-\lambda)^2+\sin^2(\omega_{12})=0$$
We can simplify:
$$\lambda^2-2\lambda\cos(\omega_{12})+1=0$$
This has solutions $\lambda=\cos(\omega_{12})\pm i\sin(\omega_{12})=\exp(\pm i\omega_{12}).$ These are complex representations. Next we seek the (unit) eigenvectors (and dropping the $\mathrm I$):
$$(\mathrm R-\exp(\pm i\omega_{12}))\mathbf e_\pm=0$$
Unpacking:
$$(\mathrm R-\exp(\pm i\omega_{12}))\mathbf e_\pm=\begin{pmatrix}\cos(\omega_{12})-\exp(\pm i\omega_{12})&\sin(\omega_{12})\\-\sin(\omega_{12})&\cos(\omega_{12})-\exp(\pm i\omega_{12})\end{pmatrix}\begin{pmatrix}x_\pm\\y_\pm\end{pmatrix}=0$$
giving:
$$\mathbf e_\pm=\frac 1 {\sqrt 2}\begin{pmatrix}1\\\mp i\end{pmatrix}$$

We’ve played a bit fast-and-loose here. First, strictly the bold-face letters represent abstract vectors, while the column vector assumes a basis, so what this is really telling us is that:
$$\mathbf e_\pm=\frac 1 {\sqrt 2}(\mathbf e_x\mp i\mathbf e_y)$$
Second, what does an imaginary or even complex component mean? Is there some restriction? Finally (I think), what is the scalar product? I have assumed a scalar product analagous to the Hermitean scalar product in quantum mechanics, so that:
$$\mathbf r\cdot \mathbf s=(r_i)^*s^i$$
where the asterisk represents complex conjugation. In terms of matrices, the $\mathbf x$ vector is Hermitean, or the conjugate transpose. We also assume the standard Euclidean metric, $\eta_{ij}=\delta_{ij}.$

So we’ve gone some way off the reservation here, and we’re about to be arrested by the maths (or math, since we’re going with a US metaphor) sheriff.

Let’s see what our vectors look like in the new basis, being a bit loose again:
$$\begin{pmatrix}x\\ y\end{pmatrix}=x\mathbf e_x+y\mathbf e_y$$
We have:
$$\mathbf e_x=\frac 1 {\sqrt 2}(\mathbf e_++\mathbf e_-),\mathbf e_y=\frac i {\sqrt 2}(\mathbf e_+-\mathbf e_-).$$

Hence:
$$x\mathbf e_x+y\mathbf e_y=(x+iy)\frac{\mathbf e_+}{\sqrt 2}+(x-iy)\frac{\mathbf e_-}{\sqrt 2}$$
We note that the projections on the new unit vectors can be read off:
$$\mathbf x=(x+iy)\frac{\mathbf e_+}{\sqrt 2}+(x-iy)\frac{\mathbf e_-}{\sqrt 2}=x^+\mathbf e_++x^-\mathbf e_-$$
The components for a real vector satisfy $x^+=(x^-)^*$. Assuming $\mathbf e_x,\mathbf e_y$, real, we also have $\mathbf e_+=(\mathbf e_-)^*.$ If we felt minded, we could write:
$$\mathbf x=x^+\mathbf e_++(x^+\mathbf e_+)^*$$

Feel like I need to set up a “flat/complex” section to expand on these matters.