<article>

# Deformed algebras

## Creation and annihilation

We start from the standard creation and annihilation operators, and a hermitean (self-adjoint) number operator:

$$[N,a^\dagger]=a^\dagger,[N,a]=-a$$

Given a state $N|n\rangle=n|n\rangle$, we can generate states $|n+1\rangle\propto a^\dagger|n\rangle$ and $|n-1\rangle\propto a|n\rangle$. This follows from the commutation relations:

$$Na^\dagger|n\rangle=(a^\dagger N+a^\dagger)|n\rangle=(n+1)a^\dagger|n\rangle$$

and the analogous calculation for $a$. This only breaks down if $a^\dagger|n\rangle=0$ or $a|n\rangle=0$. Such states, if they exist, are the maximum and minimum weight states, respectively. We are, of course, mapping this structure on our understanding of quantum mechanics, but presumably the ideas (not my own) could be of more general use.

We assume that all self-adjoint operators that commute with $N$ are functions of $N$; i.e., it is a complete set of commuting observables in itself, and if a state $|n\rangle$ exists, it is non-degenerate.

We will generally assume that the  $N$-spectrum is discrete. We can therefore decompose (with unit vectors $\langle n | n\rangle=1$):

$$N=\sum n|n\rangle\langle n|$$

We also assume that $a,a^\dagger$ are adjoints of each other.

If a self-adjoint operator $S^\dagger=S$ commutes with $N$:

$$NS|n\rangle=SN|n\rangle=nS|n\rangle.$$

This means that $S|n\rangle$ is an eigenstate of $N$ with $n$ eigenvalue and hence $S|n\rangle=s(n)|n\rangle$, since N has non-degenerate eigenstates (i.e. there at most one for _any_ possible eigenvalue). Therefore:

$$S=\sum s(n)|n\rangle\langle n|=s(N)$$

The self-adjoint combinations $aa^\dagger$ and $a^\dagger a$ commute with $N$, hence:

$$aa^\dagger=\Psi(N),a^\dagger a=\Phi(N)$$

For a discrete state $|n\rangle$, remembering that $a^\dagger|n\rangle\propto|n+1\rangle$:

$$a^\dagger aa^\dagger|n\rangle=\Phi(n+1)a^\dagger|n\rangle=\Psi(n)a^\dagger|n\rangle$$

So we have:

$$aa^\dagger=\Phi(N+1),a^\dagger a=\Phi(N)$$

We have that $\Phi$ is positive for all “physical” values of $n$, since $a,a^\dagger$ are mutual adjoints:

$$\langle n|a^\dagger a|n\rangle=\langle an|an\rangle\ge0$$

where we have abbreviated $a|n\rangle=|an\rangle$ to make things hopefully clearer. The point is that for a Born probability interpretation to work we need the states to have positive (square) norm.

The function $\Phi$ allow us to find the normalizations for $a,a^\dagger$:

$$a|n\rangle=\sqrt{\Phi(n)}|n-1\rangle$$

up to a phase. Similarly:

$$a^\dagger|n\rangle=\sqrt{\Phi(n+1)}|n+1\rangle$$

</article>