<article>

# Deformed algebras

## Standard usage

### Fermions

The simplest structure has $\Phi(0)=\Phi(1)=0$, which is an isolated “vacuum state”, $|0\rangle$. Slightly more complicated is the Fermi state pair $|0\rangle,|1\rangle$. The operators $a,a^\dagger$ annihilate these states, respectively. Hence $\Phi(0)=\Phi(2)=0$. The standard Fermi-Dirac anticommutator, $\{a,a^\dagger\}=1$ gives $\Phi(1)=1$.

### Bosons

The function $\Phi(n)=n$ gives the normal harmonic oscillator states and commutation relations: $[a,a^\dagger]=1$.

### Angular momentum and spin

It is also well known that angular momentum and spin have a creation/annihilation structure, but with the set of commuting observables consisting of the angular momentum/spin in a given direction, e.g. ($L_z,S_z$), and the squared modulus of the respective vector ($L^2,S^2$). The remaining operator components are reassembled into “raising/lowering” operators for $L_z,S_z$, e.g. $[L_z,L_+]=L_+,[L_z,L_-]=-L_-$. These operators also commute with $L^2$, which we can (will?) therefore assume is fixed (and positive, since it represents a square). Using the standard commutators (with $\hbar=1$), we find:

$$L_+L_-=L^2-L_z^2+L_z,L_-L_+=L^2-L_z^2-L_z$$

We note that $\Phi(L_z)=L^2-L_z^2+L_z$ and $\Phi(L_z+1)=L^2-L_z^2-L_z$, as required, making the suitable replacements of $N,a,a^\dagger$ by $L_z,L_+,L_-$. The angular momentum states are constrained by the requirement that $\Phi(L_z)\ge0$.

For the maximum $L_z$, $L_+|l_z^+\rangle=0$ gives to $\Phi(L_z+1)|l_z^+\rangle=0$ or $l_z^{+2}+l_z^+=L^2$. It is traditional (and useful) to express $L^2$ as $l(l+1)$, with $l$ positive. Working through, the eigenvalue $l_z^+=l$, the maximum of the two solutions to the quadratic equation.

Similarly, $\Phi(L_z)|l_z^-\rangle=0$ or $l_z^{-2}-l_z^-=l(l+1)$. To avoid a solution greater than $l_z^+$, we must have $l_z^-=-l$. Hence the eigenvalues of $L_z$ are restricted by the condition $|l_z|\le l$. if we allowed $l_z$ outside this range, $\Phi$ would enter negative, “unphysical” territory.

There is a further constraint from the integar separation of the $l_z$: we must have $l_z^+-l_z^-=(+l)-(-l)=2l$ an integer. Hence the allowed values of $l$ are half-integral. When applied physically, one finds orbital angular momentum is restricted to integral $l$. But spin, famously, is allowed to explore the spooky half-integral values. In fact, the Fermi-Dirac operators above have the same structure as for spin-1/2, somewhat shifted (back by a 1/2): $\Phi(-1/2)=0,\Phi(+1/2)=1,\Phi(+3/2)=0$. Also our isolated vacuum state is merely spin-0.

### Hamiltonian

We want to connect to the “real” world, and that usually comes through probing with some external system, like a radiation field (light, visible or otherwise). The probing reveals more or less differences in energy of the target system. The weaker the probe coupling, the better we can determine the properties (energy levels) of the target as an isolated system; for example, line-widths tend to be narrower, showing the energy differences more precisely and accurately. Generally, we want $N$ eigenstates to also be energy eigenstates, so that $H|n\rangle=\varepsilon_n|n\rangle$. So we have in effect $H=E(N)$.

The Hamiltonian also is connected with time-dependence through the Schödinger or Heisenberg equations.

A common choice for the deformed oscillator Hamiltonian is:
$$H=\frac12[aa^\dagger+a^\dagger a]=\frac12[\Phi(N+1)+\Phi(N)].$$
One could also ignore the zero point energy, and use just $H=\Phi(N)$.
</article>