## Fourier series

I was thinking about how I would show that the Bernoulli polynomials become sines and cosines asymptotically. As one does, one thinks “saddle-point?”, “Cauchy-integrate around the origin?”, “Hayman method?”, and so on. After a couple of failures to come up with something simple, I was flicking through Abramowitz and Stegun, and I noticed that the Fourier series of the polynomials for the range $0\lt x\lt1$ is what is needed. The other technique might be interesting to implement, but are not direct.

So let’s begin. For a function
$$f\sim \sum\limits_k a_k \exp(2\pi ikx)$$
(the tilde/wavy line indicates that the series may not be uniformly convergent), we have:
$$a_k=\int\limits_0^1f(x)\exp(-2\pi ikx)dx$$

We want to apply this to the generating function for Bernoulli polynomials:
$$G(x,t)=\frac {t\exp(xt)}{\exp(t)-1}$$

We get:
$$\begin{aligned}
a_k(t)=&\int\limits_0^1G(x,t)\exp(-2\pi ikx)dx\\
=&\int\limits_0^1\frac {t}{\exp(t)-1}\exp(x(t-2\pi ik))dx\\
=&\frac {t}{\exp(t)-1}\left[\frac{\exp(x(t-2\pi ik)}{t-2\pi ik}\right]_0^1\\
=&\frac {t}{\exp(t)-1}\left[\frac{\exp(t)-1}{t-2\pi ik}\right]
\end{aligned}$$
The last line may be a bit surprizing, but we need to remember that $\exp(2\pi ik)=1$ when $k$ is an integer. We are also pleasantly surprized that the exponential denominator cancels.

So we have:
$$G(x,t)\sim\sum\limits_k\frac{t\exp(2\pi ikx)}{t-2\pi ik}$$
It is wise to separate out the $k=0$ term (in fact this is $B_0(x)$):
$$G(x,t)\sim1+\sum\limits_{k\neq0}\frac{t\exp(2\pi ikx)}{t-2\pi ik}$$

There are a number of ways to approach this formula. The first thing to remember is that we are looking for the powers of $t$. Thus we want to expand the factor $t/(t-2\pi ik)$ as a power series using:
$$\frac1{1+z}=\sum\limits_{n=0}^\infty(-z)^n$$

Extracting the polynomials:
$$B_n(x)\sim-n!\sum\limits_{k\neq0}\frac{\exp(2\pi ikx)}{(2\pi ik)^n}$$

For even $n=2m$:
$$B_{2m}(x)\sim\frac{2(2m)!(-1)^{m+1}}{(2\pi)^{2m}}\sum\limits_{k=1}^\infty\frac{\cos(2\pi kx)}{k^{2m}}$$
Since $\cos(0)=1$, the even Bernoulli numbers are:
$$B_{2m}=B_{2m}(0)=\frac{2(2m)!(-1)^{m+1}}{(2\pi)^{2m}}\sum\limits_{k=1}^\infty\frac1 {k^{2m}}=\frac{2(2m)!(-1)^{m+1}}{(2\pi)^{2m}}\zeta(2m)$$
This shows a relation between the Bernoulli numbers and the (in)famous Riemann zeta function:
$$\zeta(s)=\sum\limits_{k=1}^\infty\frac1 {k^s}$$
We have removed the tilde/wavy line since the series is absolutely convergent. We could also have done this for the Bernoulli polynomials since they are also absolutely convergent for $m>0$, and we have already extracted $B_0(x)=1$ from consideration.

For odd $n=2m+1$:
$$B_{2m+1}(x)\sim\frac{2(2m+1)!(-1)^{m+1}}{(2\pi)^{2m+1}}\sum\limits_{k=1}^\infty\frac{\sin(2\pi kx)}{k^{2m+1}}$$
The tilde can be removed for $m>0$ since the series are also absolutely convergent. However, for $m=0$, the tilde must stay since the series is only pointwise convergent for $0\lt x\lt1$, but not at the limits. This arises because the values at the limits are not the same, $B_1(0)=-1/2$ and $B_1(1)=+1/2$ , and the periodization is discontinuous. I won’t go into more detail here since convergence of Fourier series is a complex topic.

Thus these Fourier series represent the periodization of the Bernoulli polynomials, $P_n(x)=B_n({x})$, and converge uniformly when $n\gt1$.