<article>

# Curvature

## Problem

For the moment I am just recording some calculations concerning the radius of curvature of a path.

In the radius of curvature problem, one wants to compare a path with a circle near some point. If the path $\mathbf r$ is parameterized by $t$, we can Taylor expand about any time $t_0$:

$$\mathbf r(t)\approx\mathbf r(t_0)+\mathbf{\dot r}(t_0)(t-t_0)+\frac 12\mathbf{\ddot r}(t_0)(t-t_0)^2\dots$$

We expand to second order since first order just gives a straight line. We use dots to abbreviate derivatives with respect to $t$.

We choose a 2-dimensional frame with $\mathbf r(t_0)$ as the origin, and a vector basis in the plane of the velocity $\mathbf{\dot r}$ and acceleration $\mathbf{\ddot r}$ (we explicate as if ${t}$ is time, but it could be a spatial parameter).

[**Aside**: We are assuming that $\mathbf{\dot r}$ and $\mathbf{\ddot r}$ are not parallel. In the case that they are parallel, one has to Taylor expand to higher order. If the vectors are parallel to all orders, the curve is a straight line, at least in the neighbourhood of $t_0$.]

We define a unit vector parallel to $\mathbf{\dot r}$, $\mathbf{i}=\mathbf{\dot r}/\dot r$. A perpendicular vector is given by $\mathbf{\ddot r}_\perp=\mathbf{\ddot r}-(\mathbf{i}.\mathbf{\ddot r})\mathbf{i}$. The length of this vector is given by $\ddot r_\perp^2=\ddot r^2-(\mathbf{i}.\mathbf{\ddot r})^2$. The corresponding unit vector is $\mathbf j=\mathbf{\ddot r}_\perp/\ddot r_\perp$. This frame will change with $t_0$.

Our Taylor expansion in this frame is:

$$\mathbf r(t)\approx\mathbf{i}\left[\dot r(t_0)(t-t_0)+\frac 12(\mathbf{i.\ddot r})(t_0)(t-t_0)^2\right]+\mathbf j\frac 12\ddot r_\perp(t_0)(t-t_0)^2\dots$$

We now propose to use complex variable theory to relate this decomposition to a circular motion.

A circular path in the complex plane is given by $z(t)=c+\rho e^{i\theta(t)}$. [Euler has given us that $e^{i\theta}=\cos(\theta)+i\sin(\theta)$.] Taylor expanding:

$$z(t)\approx c+\rho e^{i\theta(t_0)}[1+i\dot \theta(t_0)(t-t_0)+\frac 12(i\ddot \theta(t_0))-\dot \theta(t_0)^2(t-t_0)^2]$$

I can see a number of ways to extract the information we need. We will assume that $\theta(t_0)=0$. This essentially orients the plane so that the circle centre is on the real axis. We also want the initial point $z(t_0)=0$. These assumptions give $c+\rho=0$. Hence:

$$z(t)\approx \rho[i\dot \theta(t_0)(t-t_0)+\frac 12(i\ddot \theta(t_0))-\dot \theta(t_0)^2(t-t_0)^2]$$

The imaginary direction is the same as our unit vector $\mathbf i$. Hence we read off:

$$\rho[\dot \theta(t_0)(t-t_0)+\frac 12\ddot \theta(t_0)(t-t_0)^2]=\dot r(t_0)(t-t_0)+\frac 12(\mathbf{i.\ddot r})(t_0)(t-t_0)^2$$

Even further:

$$\rho\dot \theta(t_0)=\dot r(t_0)$$

$$\rho\ddot \theta(t_0)=\mathbf{i.\ddot r}(t_0)$$

In the real direction:

$$-\frac 12\rho\dot \theta(t_0)^2(t-t_0)^2=-\frac 12\ddot r_\perp(t_0)(t-t_0)^2$$

Here the unit vector $\mathbf j$ is in the negative real direction, towards the centre of the circle at $-\rho$. Anyhow, stripping the Taylor detritus:

$$\rho\dot \theta(t_0)^2=\ddot r_\perp(t_0)$$

We can determine $\dot \theta(t_0)=[\ddot r_\perp/\dot r](t_0)$ and $\rho(t_0)=[\dot r^2/\ddot r_\perp](t_0)$. We note the space and time (dot) dimensions tally with the angular velocity and radius.

We are now ready to re-/un-wind these results to scalar products. The sticking point is $\ddot r_\perp$. Looking back, $\ddot r_\perp^2=\ddot r^2-(\mathbf{i}.\mathbf{\ddot r})^2$ with $\mathbf{i}=\mathbf{\dot r}/\dot r$. Making the substitution, $\ddot r_\perp^2=\ddot r^2-(\mathbf{\dot r.\ddot r})^2/\dot r^2$.

Assuming evaluation at $t_0$:

$$\dot \theta=\frac {\sqrt{(\dot r\ddot r)^2-(\mathbf{\dot r.\ddot r})^2}}{\dot r^2}$$

$$\rho=\frac{\dot r^3}{\sqrt{(\dot r\ddot r)^2-(\mathbf{\dot r.\ddot r})^2}}$$

In three dimensions the object under the square root can be expressed more compactly in terms of the cross product, but this does not easily generalize to other dimensions:

$$(\mathbf{\dot r\times \ddot r})^2=\dot r^2\ddot r^2-(\mathbf{\dot r.\ddot r})^2$$

We note that the length of this object (expressed as a cross product or not, as appropriate) is zero when the velocity and acceleration are parallel. The radius of curvature is then infinite.

</article>