<article>

# Curvature

## Euler-Bernoulli beaming

I started this section as a result of trying to understand Euler-Bernoulli beams from an energy/action perspective (i.e. avoiding Newtonian force analysis, at least to begin with). [It involves curvature, in case you are wondering.] I remember at school brief contact with the mechanics of cantilevers (beams fixed at one end), either dynamically or statically. This ended with fourth order differential equations. I was either too stupid, or the teacher (physics? maths?) mumbled during this part, but I never was really clear how this worked. So almost 50 years later . . .

We are used to materials having varying elasticity. This means that if we prod or pull things, they deform a little or a lot. For the Euler-Bernoulli beam, we assume that the material is “linear” with Young’s modulus, $E$. We avoid all the complications that can arise: directionality, transverse effects (Poisson's ratio), etc.

When we stretch an object it pulls back (tension), trying to get back to its “normal” shape. If we compress it, it pushes back (compression).

The amount an object is extended or compressed is called the _strain_, $\varepsilon$. Stretching gives positive strain, compression negative. Strain is measured relative to the underformed object, a bit like growth/recession when expressed as a percentage.

The force set up by a strain acts across an area like pressure. It acts in the opposite direction to the strain. This force (per unit area) is called the _stress_, $\sigma$.

At the simple level we are using, $\sigma=E\varepsilon$.

A beam in simple terms has a length, $L$, and cross-sectional area, $A$. For a beam, we tend to assume $A\lt L^2$, or better $A\ll L^2$. In some situations, we can assume with caveats that $A$ varies a little along $L$.

We stretch the beam to $L'$. The strain is $(L'-L)/L$. The stress, $\sigma=E(L'-L)/L=T/A$, where $T$ is tension. We are still in the world of Newton. We want to simplify our/my life by going to an energy prespective.

The work done in stretching the beam by $dL'$ is $TdL'=AL\sigma d\varepsilon$. Since $AL$ is the volume of the beam, we see that $\sigma d\varepsilon$ is the work done per unit volume. We can integrate this as $\int\sigma d\varepsilon=\int E\varepsilon d\varepsilon=E\varepsilon^2/2$, the strain potential energy per unit volume. We have taken this energy to be zero at zero strain.

We now look to extending the horizon of beam problems we can tackle. We don’t just want to extend along the length of the beam, we want to also be able to bend it (at least in our minds). And yeah, I split infinitives since I am not writing Latin.

So we split the beam into chunks $d\tau=dxdydz=dLdA$. A chunk is deformed from $\mathbf r_0$ to $\mathbf r(\mathbf r_0)$. We use positions in the undeformed beam to label the deformed chunks.

We will start with 1-dimensional problems with the cross-section $A$ staying constant, and the length $x$ of the chunk expanding or contracting. The beam is fixed at $x_0=x(x_0)=0$.

We first repeat what was done above and stretch the beam from $L$ to $x(L)=L'$. The strain in a chunk $\Delta x$ from $x_0$ is $\varepsilon(x_0)=(x(x_0+\Delta x)-x(x_0)-\Delta x)/\Delta x=x'(x_0)-1$, where the prime symbol is differentiation by $x_0$. So we have:

$$V=\int EA \frac{(x'-1)^2}2dx_0$$

We ignore the slight ambiguity in whether we are using the undeformed or deformed volume.

The calculus of variations enables us to determine the function $x(x_0)$ that minimizes the potential energy. The Euler-Lagrange equations give us $x''=0$, so $x(x_0)=ax_0+b$. The boundary conditions are $x(0)=0$ and $x(L)=L'$; thus, $x(x_0)=L'x_0/L$. Not a surprizing result.

We note that the strain is the same at all $x_0$ in the beam, $L'/L$. In this case it matters not if we attribute the strain to the whole beam or in a point-like fashion. This will not be true in more complicated situations.

Let us look at a beam with constant density $\rho$ hanging in a uniform gravity field, $g$. Again we stipulate $x(0)=0$. The vertical direction is $x$ pointing down. Gravitation potential energy is given by $mgh$, where $m$ is the mass, and $h$ is the height lifted above some point.

The potential is $V=\int [E(x'-1)^2/2-\rho gx]Adx_0$. If we vary the deformation function, $\delta x$, and integrate the first term by parts:

$$\delta V=[E(x'-1)\delta x]_0^L-\int [Ex''+\rho g]\delta x Adx_0=0$$

For this to be an extremum, the boundary term gives $x'(L)=1$. The zero boundary has $\delta x=0$ since $x(x_0)=x_0=0$. The integrand must be zero for arbitrary variations: $Ex''+\rho g=0$.

The boundary condition at $L$ gives $x'(x_0)=1+\rho g(L-x_0)/E$. The boundary condition $x(0)=0$ gives $x(x_0)=x_0+\rho g(Lx_0-x_0^2/2)/E$. The elongation $L'-L=x(L)-L=\rho gL^2/2E$.

We could go through the same sort of considerations to get the compression of a beam/post standing upright. Essentially the only change is in the direction of gravity so $x(x_0)=x_0-\rho g(Lx_0-x_0^2/2)/E$. The post shortens by $L-L'=L-x(L)=\rho gL^2/2E$.

Within this context, fairly simple extensions could lead to beams of varying cross-section and/or material composition (affecting elasticity/density).

</article>