<article>

# Curvature

## Euler-Bernoulli bending

So far we have just done linear strain in a straight line. Euler has been barely mentioned (in conjunction with Lagrange), and Bernoulli only nodded to. Also the differential equations have only been to second, not fourth order. It is bending that produces the higher orders.

The Euler-Bernoulli assumption is that the beam is reasonably well defined by its $x_0$ parameter, along with a judicious lumping together of transverse characteristics in slices.

We imagine a slice originally at $x_0$ transported to $\mathbf r(x_0)$. The slice may be rotated and/or scrunched/stretched.

The slice is bounded by planes at $x_0$ and $x_0+\Delta x$. We assume the deformed slice is also bounded by planes that are perpendicular to $\mathbf r'(x_0)$ and $\mathbf r'(x_0+\Delta x)$, respectively. [Timoshenko beam theory relaxes/removes the perpendicularity assumption.]

Here is where _curvature_ plays a role. With these assumptions is relatively easy (i.e. not easy, but easier than without the assumptions) to deduce the non-uniform strain energy contributions in the transverse direction.

We assume $\mathbf r'(x_0)$ and $\mathbf r'(x_0+\Delta x)$ are in the same plane as $\mathbf r''(x_0)$, which is almost true as $\Delta x\rightarrow0$.

Since I am making this up as I go along, I will consider a 2-dimensional beam with co-ordinate parameter $y_0$ in the transverse direction and no deformation in the third dimension. The deformed slice is a wedge approximately bending in a circle with the centre of curvature as given in the introduction to this work. The portions closer to the centre of curvature will be less extended/more compressed compared with those further away. We take the strain as being given by the extra length of arc relative to no strain.

We use a local coordinate system where $\mathbf r(x_0,y_0)=(0,y_0)$ and $\mathbf r(x_0+\Delta x,y_0)=(x(y_0),y_0)$. The strain energy of the slice will be:

$$\int Ew \frac{(x(y_0)-\Delta x)^2}{2\Delta x^2}dy_0\Delta x$$

where $w$ is the beam width in the third dimension. It could be dependent on $y_0$. If the radius of curvature $\rho$ and angular change $\theta'$ are given for $y_0=0$, we have $x\approx (\rho-y_0)\theta'\Delta x$, giving an energy

$$\int Ew \frac{((\rho-y_0)\theta'-1)^2}{2}dy_0\Delta x$$

Our Euler-Bernoulli assumptions mean that $\rho$ and $\theta'$ do not depend on $y_0$. We can notionally do the transverse integrations. First, $\int w dy_0=A$. We can shift the origin so that $\int wy_0 dy_0=0$. Finally, $\int w y_0^2dy_0=I$, the second moment of area of the cross-section (sometimes referred to as moment of inertia, which more strictly requires a mass) about $y_0=0$, the centroid.

So we have strain energy:

$$E \frac{A(\rho\theta'-1)^2+I\theta'^2}{2}\Delta x$$

The first term is the stretching/compression of the element. The second term is the bending energy. From the introduction, and integrating over the length of the beam:

$$\int E \frac{A(r'-1)^2+I((r''/r')^2-(\mathbf{r'.r''}/r'^2)^2)}{2}dx_0$$

One could substitute components for the vectors and scalars to get what looks to be an even more complicated formula.
</article>