<article>

# M&ouml;bius transformations

## Projections

The M&ouml;bius transform is defined for complex z:
$$z'=\frac{az+b}{cz+d}$$

In this form it is somewhat difficult to unpack. In a handwaving way one can see that the &ldquo;point&rdquo; at infinity is transformed to $a/c$. Conversely, the point $-d/c$ goes to infinity. A small improvement is to view the transformation as acting on the &ldquo;Riemann sphere&rdquo; consisting of the union of the complex plane, $\mathbb C$, and $\{\infty\}$, i.e. $\hat\mathbb C=\mathbb C \cup\{\infty\}$. There are ways of making this sphericity more obvious with projections and so forth.

The inverse transformation is also a M&ouml;bius transform, as is the composition of two M&ouml;bius transformations. This, therefore forms a M&ouml;bius transformation group. However, the form of the composition and inverse are rather complex looking.

Things become clearer by expressing $\hat\mathbb C$ as the complex projective line $\mathbb{CP}^1$. There are various ways to express the &ldquo;points&rdquo; of $\mathbb{CP}^1$.

The basic representation of projective geometry is as the one-dimensional subspaces of some vector space. With the one-dimensional subspaces (lines through the origin) regarded as points, the projective space has one less dimension than vector space used to represent it.

There are ways to define projective geometry outside this paradigm, but in dimensions greater than 2, it can be shown to be isomorphic to it. The dimension-2 projective planes include the one-dimensional subspaces of 3-dimensional vector space, along with a slew of others. From what I remember, the projective line doesn't really fit into the general axiomatic framework and is usually used to describe the one-dimensional subspaces of a dimension-2 vector space.

Here we are interested in 2-dimensional complex vector spaces and the resulting projective line. The standard coordinate respresentation of the vector space is using pairs of complex number, $(z_1,z_2)\in\mathbb C^2$. The one-dimensional subspaces are given by lines through the origin. In &ldquo;homogeneous&rdquo; coordinates these lines are $[z_1:z_2]=\{c(z_1,z_2):c\in\mathbb C-\{0\}\}$. We also restrict to at least one of $z_1,z_2$ being non-zero. These conditions exclude the origin from the lines to ensure that these sets of $\mathbb C^2$ points are disjoint. The definition partitions $\mathbb C^2-\{(0,0)\}$ into lines/dimension-1 subspaces.

From the definition we see $[z_1:z_2]=[cz_1:cz_2]$ for any $c\in\mathbb C-\{0\}$. One can transition to a unique 1-dimensional coordinate $z=z_1/z_2$ from $c=1/z_2$ giving $[z_1:z_2]=[z_1/z_2:1]$. This works for all lines except $[z,0]$, which is essentially &ldquo;infinity&rdquo;.

This sort of projectivity is seen particularly in quantum mechanics.

So how does the M&ouml;bius transformation fit into this perspective? Well, going to homogeneous coordinates:

$$[z':1]=\left[\frac{az+b}{cz+d}:1\right]=[az+b:cz+d]$$

Writing $z=z_1/z_2$ and similarly for $z'$, we get after suitable rescalings:

$$[z'_1:z'_2]=[az_1+b_2z_2:cz_1+dz_2]$$

We can view this as a matrix/linear transformation in the vector space. Linear transformations take lines to lines, including the 1-dimensional subspaces, since the origin is fixed. Hence, the linear transformation goes to a well-defined transformation of the projective line.

The linear transformations of $\mathbb C^2$ form the general linear transformation group of 2-dimensional complex vectors space, $\mathrm{GL}(2,\mathbb C)$.

These transformations correspond to transformations of the projective line. We now want to investigate this homomorphism.

The first task is to look for the $\mathrm{GL}(2,\mathbb C)$ elements that correspond to the identity on the projective line. This is called the _kernel_. These are the dilations from the origin by some complex factor: in matrix terms, the identity multiplied by a non-zero complex number. The homomorphism theorems of group theory give an isomorphism between the quotient group $\mathrm{GL}(2,\mathbb C)/\mathbb C^*$, where $\mathbb C^*$ is the multiplicative group of non-zero complex numbers, and the M&ouml;bius transformations, which we symbolize as $\mathrm{PGL}(2,\mathbb C)$.

Dividing a matrix by a square root of its determinant gives a matrix of determinant 1, a member of the special linear group, $\mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb C)$. Unfortunately this transformation is not well-defined due to the sign ambiguity of the square root.

A determinant 1 matrix does correspond to a transformation of the projective line. This time the kernel is the identity multiplied by a non-zero complex number. However the determinant 1 condition forces the square of the complex number to be 1. In other words $\pm1$. We symbolize multiplicative group on $\{+1,=1\}$ as $\mathbb Z_2$. We have the isomorphism $\mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb C)/\mathbb Z_2\cong\mathrm{PGL}(2,\mathbb C)$, once we show the homomorphism to be onto (surjective). This can be done by choosing one of the two $\mathrm{SL}(2,\mathbb C)$ projections of $\mathrm{GL}(2,\mathbb C)$ matrix each of which leads to the same $\mathrm{PGL}(2,\mathbb C)$ transformation.

</article>